DOCSP-28007: date operations (#343)
mongodb/docs-java: source/fundamentals/aggregation/aggregation-expression-operations.txt

                                      then: "extreme temperature",
                                      else: "no advisory" } } } }

Date Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can perform a date operation using the methods described in this
section. Date operations either work on values of type ``MqlDate`` or
return ``MqlDate`` values.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Java Method
     - Aggregation Pipeline Operator

> 

Reviewer: [suggestion]
The entries in this table do not seem to follow a consistent order paradigm. Since they are not all time-based (so we can't do smallest to largest), I recommend sorting them alphabetically. Since the Java Method and Aggregation Pipeline Operator do not always match, one would need to be picked for alphabetical. I'd recommend the Java Method since it is the first one readers' eyes see in the table.

   
   * - `week() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#week(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$week </reference/operator/aggregation/week/>`

   * - `hour() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#hour(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$hour </reference/operator/aggregation/hour/>`

   * - `minute() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#minute(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$minute </reference/operator/aggregation/minute/>`

   * - `second() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#second(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$second </reference/operator/aggregation/second/>`

   * - `millisecond() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#millisecond(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$millisecond </reference/operator/aggregation/millisecond/>`

.. include:: /includes/fundamentals/agg-mql-diff.rst

> Suppose you have some UTC time series data and need to

Reviewer: [grammar]
Since "UTC time series" is being used as a compound adjective instead of as a noun, it should be hyphenated. I pulled out the UTC because having the double hypen looked odd to me.

```suggestion
Suppose you have some time-series data in UTC and need to
```

Reviewer: Alternative, you could reword to change "time series" into a noun.

```suggestion
Suppose you have a time series in UTC and need to
```

Author: added the full name to follow the style guide

match events that occurred on any Monday in 2018.

To get the year from the ``date`` field, use the ``year()`` method, and to

> check if the year is ``2018``, use the ``eq()`` method. To get the day of
> the week (as a number), use the ``dayOfWeek()`` method, and to check if
> the day is Monday, corresponding to ``2``, use the ``eq()`` method.

Reviewer: [suggestion]
This sentence reads a little long to me. Is it possible to break up into two, or would that be too many "to do X..." sentences?

```suggestion
check if the year is ``2018``, use the ``eq()`` method. To get the day of
the week (as a number), use the ``dayOfWeek()`` method. To check if
the day is Monday, corresponding to ``2``, use the ``eq()`` method.
```

Author: How is this revision?

The following code shows the pipeline stage for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

   Arrays.asList(match(
           expr(current()
                   .getDate("date")
                   .year(of("UTC"))
                   .eq(of(2018))
                   .and(current()
                           .getDate("date")
                           .dayOfWeek(of("UTC"))
                           .eq(of(2))))
   ));
         
The following code provides an equivalent aggregation pipeline in
the Query API:
   
.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: true

   [
     { $match: {
         $expr: {
           $and: [
             { $eq: [ { $year: { date: "$date",
                                 timezone: "UTC" } }, 2018 ] },
             { $eq: [ { $dayOfWeek: { date: "$date",
                                      timezone: "UTC" } }, 2 ] },

>            ] } }

Reviewer: [suggestion]
Matching string operations.
```suggestion
           ] 
         } 
       }
```

   * - `minute() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#minute(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$minute </reference/operator/aggregation/minute/>`

   * - `month() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#month(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$month </reference/operator/aggregation/month/>`

   * - `parseDate() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlString.html#parseDate()>`__
     - :manual:`$dateFromString </reference/operator/aggregation/dateFromString/>`

   * - `second() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#second(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$second </reference/operator/aggregation/second/>`

   * - `week() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#week(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$week </reference/operator/aggregation/week/>`

   * - `year() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#year(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__

>      - :manual:`$year </reference/operator/aggregation/year/>`

Reviewer 2: Consider sorting all of the "component" methods (year, day, etc.) by granularity, and putting them at the bottom of the list. It seems a bit hard to scan this list as it is.

     - :manual:`$hour </reference/operator/aggregation/hour/>`

   * - `minute() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#minute(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$minute </reference/operator/aggregation/minute/>`

   * - `second() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#second(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$second </reference/operator/aggregation/second/>`

   * - `millisecond() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDate.html#millisecond(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - :manual:`$millisecond </reference/operator/aggregation/millisecond/>`

.. include:: /includes/fundamentals/agg-mql-diff.rst

Suppose you have some time-series data and need to match events that
occurred on any Monday in the ``"America/New_York"`` time zone.

Since the ``date`` field has string values, such as
``"2018-01-15T16:00:00Z"``, you need to use the ``parseDate()``
method to convert the strings to ``MqlDate`` types.

> To get the day of the week (as a number) from the ``date`` field, use the ``dayOfWeek()``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get the day of the week (as a number) from the date, use the ``dayOfWeek()``
```
(not directly the date field, but the date value it got parsed to). To distinguish between "date" as a type and the field name "date", it might help to call the field "deliveryDate" or "sent" or something of the sort.
